Received: (qmail 29432 invoked from network); 28 Aug 2004 16:54:50 -0000
Received: from iglu.org.il (HELO eskimo.iglu.org.il) ([192.117.122.34])
          (envelope-sender <aettlinger@worldnet.att.net>)
          by smtp04-01.mesa1.secureserver.net (qmail-ldap-1.03) with SMTP
          for <shlomif@episight.com>; 28 Aug 2004 16:54:50 -0000
Received: (qmail 15617 invoked by alias); 28 Aug 2004 16:54:47 -0000
Delivered-To: iglu.org.il-shlomif@iglu.org.il
Received: (qmail 15615 invoked from network); 28 Aug 2004 16:54:47 -0000
Received: from unknown (HELO mtiwmhc11.worldnet.att.net) (204.127.131.115)
  by iglu.org.il with SMTP; 28 Aug 2004 16:54:47 -0000
Received: from computername (60.new-york-26rh16rt-27rh15rt.ny.dial-access.att.net[12.75.166.60])
          by worldnet.att.net (mtiwmhc11) with SMTP
          id <2004082816544211100b2c9ae>; Sat, 28 Aug 2004 16:54:43 +0000
Message-ID: <003601c48d1f$b67610f0$9865fea9@computername>
From: "Adrian Ettlinger" <aettlinger@worldnet.att.net>
To: "Shlomi Fish" <shlomif@iglu.org.il>
References: <200408272313.24958.shlomif@iglu.org.il>
Subject: More on Ayn Rand
Date: Sat, 28 Aug 2004 12:52:06 -0400
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain;
  charset="iso-8859-1"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Priority: 3
X-MSMail-Priority: Normal
X-Mailer: Microsoft Outlook Express 6.00.2800.1409
X-MIMEOLE: Produced By Microsoft MimeOLE V6.00.2800.1409
X-Nonspam: None
X-Spam-Checker-Version: SpamAssassin 3.0.0-pre4 (2004-08-04) on 
	localhost.localdomain
X-Spam-Level: 
X-Spam-Status: No, score=0.0 required=5.0 tests=BAYES_50 autolearn=ham 
	version=3.0.0-pre4
X-UID: 
Status: RO
X-Status: R
X-KMail-EncryptionState: N
X-KMail-SignatureState: N
X-KMail-MDN-Sent: 

Hi Shlomi,

    This is long because the second item is a long paste-in of an excellent
biography and assessment of Ayn Rand, which I'm feeding to you so as to not
require you to go the website where I found it.

    Firstly, a very short piece pertaining to the movie:
=======================================
Ayn Rand was furious when she heard that Howard Roark's speech at the trial
was being trimmed, chiefly because it was considered long, rambling and
confusing, especially to Gary Cooper who didn't understand it. She got the
studio to make sure that the speech was untouched and in its entirety in the
finished product.
=======================================
    Further to that, from other tidbits I'd read, it appears the ending of
the movie is faithful to the novel after all.

    The second paste-in is this bio and assessment, which I thought was very
well done.  Some added comments below.
=======================================
The life and work of Ayn Rand, the novelist and philosopher who promoted an
ethics called "Objectivism," provide ample evidence for those who believe
that human beings are inherently self-contradictory and illogical. In her
novels, Rand glorified the self-made man who aggressively demonstrated his
superiority over the masses through his business acumen. As a writer, Rand
had little to do with entrepreneurial activities. While she did eventually
make money from her writing, she always lived frugally. Her husband of fifty
years was a quiet and reserved man, never financially successful, who was
happiest in his garden or painting at his easel. Her ideal physical types
were tall, blond, muscular men and delicate, graceful blonde women-she
herself was small, dark, and never at ease with her body. She believed
passionately in the importance of the individual, yet her books developed a
cultlike following among the millions of people who read them. The chief
irony is that Rand became best known for her insistence on the primacy of
human reason.

The eldest of three sisters, Ayn Rand was born Alissa Rosenbaum on February
2, 1905, in St. Petersburg, Russia, to Fronz and Anna Rosenbaum. Her father,
a pharmacist, had his own shop, a rare position for Jews in Russia. A
precocious child, Alyssa declared herself an atheist in her early teens, and
while she never denied her Jewish heritage, she also never softened her
opposition to religion or any other form of "mysticism." The privations she
and her family endured as a result of the Russian Revolution, Including the
Bolsheviks taking possession of her father's business, affected her deeply.
Somehow she managed to survive the purges of bourgeois students long enough
to obtain a degree in history from the University of Leningrad in 1924. At
the university, she took a few classes in American political history and
found the principles expressed in the Declaration of Independence
fascinating.

Despite the progressively isolationist policy of the Soviets, some Western
exports still found their way to Russia in the 1920s. For Alyssa, the most
important were American movies. Conditions in the United States-at least as
depicted on the screen-impressed her as strongly as conditions at home
repelled her, so when distant cousins provided the miraculous opportunity to
travel to the United States, she did not hesitate. She turned twenty-one in
Berlin, on her way to America. At immigration, she announced that her first
name was Ayn (pronounced to rhyme with "pine"). Shortly after, she chose the
second part of her beloved typewriter's brand name for her surname.

Deciding that Chicago, her cousins' home, was too provincial, she moved to
California to write for the movies. A fluke encounter with Cecil B. DeMille
on her second day in Hollywood led to a job as an extra in the film The King
of Kings. This gave her a glimpse of a bit player named Frank O'Connor, the
man she would marry in April 1929. But her ambition to write for the movies
was not so easily fulfilled, and she scraped by for years on the salary she
earned working in RKO's wardrobe department, writing in her spare time. Her
first break came with a stage play Night of January 16th, which was produced
on Broadway during the 1935 season. Royalties from the modestly successful
play gave her the freedom to concentrate on her writing

Rand's first novel, We the Living, appeared in 1936. A melodrama dismissed
by most reviewers as overbearingly anti-Soviet, it quickly went out of
print. Since her husband rarely worked, Rand had little but her own passion
to support her during her next major, project, the novel that was to become
The Fountainhead. While writing The Fountainhead, Rand wrote a futuristic
novella entitled Anthem about the struggle of two lovers in a collective
society to reclaim the concept of a self. At the time, only a British
publisher would touch it. A stage version of We the Living called The
Unconquered also failed. Eventually Rand found studio work again, reading
screenplays for Paramount. This job provided the contact with an editor at
Bobbs-Merrill who, on the strength of the first several chapters, promised
to publish The Fountainhead.

After a slow start and generally unsympathetic reviews upon its publication
in May 1943, the book became a best-seller, and by the end of 1949, it had
sold half a million copies. The protagonist, an architect named Howard
Roark, embodied Rand's ideal man, an individualist who would assert his own
convictions in the face of complete social opposition. In the novel's
climactic scene, Roark blows up a public housing project (before occupation)
rather than see his vision and plans grossly distorted. Yet Roark is not the
thorough outcast he might seem. At his subsequent trial, he speaks so
eloquently about his beliefs that the jury refuses to convict him. Rand
wrote the screenplay for the movie version, starring Gary Cooper and
Patricia Neal, which was released in 1949. The popular success of The
Fountainhead established Rand's career as a novelist and put her on secure
financial ground for the first time in her life.

Her increasing fame brought her hundreds of fan letters and enlarged her
social circle. By the early 1950s, she had cultivated a devoted coterie
consisting mostly of college students and recent graduates eager to emulate
her fictional heroes. Two of them, Nathan Blumenthal and his eventual wife,
Barbara Weidman, apparently became so important to Rand that, in 1951, she
and her husband followed them to New York City, where Rand and her husband
spent the rest of their lives. In New York, Rand continued to work on what
would be her last novel, Atlas Shrugged. In regular Saturday night salons,
she would share portions of her work-in-progress with her group.

Rand and her husband served as witnesses at Blumenthal and Weidman's wedding
in 1953, testifying to their close relationship. In her 1986 biography of
Rand, Weidman claims the dubious distinction of naming the sexual attraction
between her own husband and Rand in late 1954. Once that element was
acknowledged, both Rand and Blumenthal (now named Nathaniel Branden)
evidently felt justified by Rand's own tenets in embarking on an intense
secret affair. According to Rand, sexual desire should go hand-in-hand with
intellectual respect and shared ideals. Given their mutual interests and
commitments, it was inevitable for a physical passion to develop between
them-and unthinkable for it not to be fulfilled, despite their marriages and
the twenty-five-year age difference. When Atlas Shrugged appeared through
Random House, after a search for a publishing house that would not cut her
work-it carried a joint dedication to her husband and to Branden.

Like The Fountainhead, Atlas Shrugged eventually became a best-seller. Like
the earlier novel, it attracted negative reviews. Most critics found the
premise of the novel-that the most gifted, creative, and successful members
of a society are exploited by the untalented and unappreciative masses-only
slightly less implausible than the major action of the novel, a strike of
geniuses to force an end to their abuse.

Devastated by the poor critical response, exhausted from twelve years of
effort, and discouraged by the thought that she might have written all she
had to say, Rand withdrew. It was Branden who succeeded in restoring her
confidence and supporting her second crest of fame by inaugurating regular
lectures on Rand's philosophy. Under the auspices of the Nathaniel Branden
Institute, he and several other faithful students offered talks on "The
Basic Principles of Objectivism," covering subjects such as "The Nature of
Emotions,'' "Social Metaphysics," "The Ethics Of Altruism," and "What is
Reason" The lectures soon drew hundreds of people in New York and expanded
to several sites around the country. Sales of Atlas Shrugged continued to
build-its opening sentence, "Who is John Galt," became a popular password
for those in the know-and Rand flourished in the attention. Although she
herself delivered few lectures at Nathaniel Branden Institute, she did tour
the country to speak on numerous college campuses. With Branden, she began a
monthly called The Objectivist Newsletter, later expanded and renamed simply
The Objectivist Both versions contained essays by Rand, Branden, and other
associates (including perhaps her most celebrated admirer, the economist
Alan Greenspan, now chairman of the Federal Reserve Board) that analyzed
current political events and applied the principles of Objectivism to
everyday life. The last books Rand published were collections of essays
taken from the Objectivist periodicals.

The cohesion of the Objectivist movement shattered irrevocably, however, in
1968 when Branden finally admitted to Rand that lie would not resume their
long-suspended affair. In response, Rand denounced Branden. accusing him of
betraying essential Objectivist principles, and forced him to sever all
connections with Objectivist activities, Including the institute bearing his
name. Most devotees accepted her judgment and condemned Branden, even
without particulars, but the upheaval occurred at a particularly inopportune
moment. Rand had begun to lose her primary audience, usually young,
idealistic adults, to other causes, and her customary argumentativeness in
public appearances became less refreshing and more defensive and alienating.
Criticism of Rand's sexual politics began to figure as prominently as
attacks on her doctrine of "rational selfishness." The first sexual
encounter in The Fountainhead between Howard Roark and Dominique Francon
became emblematic of a peculiarly American romanticization of rape, at least
according to feminists like Susan Brownmiller. Circulation losses pushed her
to reduce The Objectivist to a smaller form again, called The Ayn Rand
Letter, which appeared more and more irregularly until she ended publication
in 1975.

Other personal losses took a toll as well: Her husband began to show signs
of dementia years before his death in 1979, and the joyous news that her
youngest and favorite sister Nora still lived led only to a brief and
painfully disappointing reunion in 1973. She made a strong recovery from
surgery for lung cancer in 1974, but she no longer had the stamina or the
focus to devote herself to any large writing project.

Apart from intermittent appearances in television interviews, Ayn Rand's
last regular speaking engagement was her annual lecture at Boston's Ford
Hall Forum. Nevertheless, she had completed about one-fourth of a screenplay
for a television miniseries of Atlas Shrugged and was in the midst of
preparing her next Ford Hall lecture at the time of her death, on March 6,
1982. Several hundred mourners waited in the cold to enter the Manhattan
funeral home where her body was laid out, alongside a six-foot floral dollar
sign, the following day. The graveside service in Valhalla, New York,
consisted only of a reading of Kipling's poem "If' before Rand was buried
beside her husband.

An assessment of Rand's reputation a decade and a half after her death must
account for several contradictory factors. Few professional philosophers
take her work at all seriously, yet many groups of readers and fans still
debate and write about her theories. Her work continues to appeal to those
who search for non-religious answers about human progress and agency.
Certainly her declaration that selfishness is a virtue and altruism a vice
is contrary to traditional Jewish values-yet her exaltation of personal
ambition is not so different from that of many Russian Jewish immigrants of
her generation who savored the relative freedom of America. Despite their
dismissal by the critical establishment, her books continue to sell.
Together, her novels have sold approximately twenty-five million copies, a
figure that still grows by about 250,000 every year. Rand might not have
succeeded in achieving the immediate influence of a crusading novelist like
Harriet Beecher Stowe, as she had hoped, but her popularity today testifies
to an enduring appeal.
=========================================
    Adrian's assessment.  Rand's attitude is perfectly understandable, given
her early life.  And obviously brilliiant mind.  Interesting that she became
both anti-communist and anti-religion.  I think there's little doubt that if
she had instead grown up in Nazi Germany, and had her family suffered
similar mistreatment (but survived), she would have written as an
anti-Fascist rather than an anti-Soviet.  I thought the final paragraph
above was a very fair and balanced appraisal of her place on the
philosophical landscape.

    I'm left with the feeling that I wish I'd been acquainted with her.  We
were both living in New York for a long interval of time.

Best regards, -----------------------------Adrian


